Q61. 
Which of the following is an example of RPA that is used to proceed with business 
innovation with the aim of resolving management issues, such as a shortage of staff members? 
 
a) Deploying robots for assembly work instead of employees engaged in the assembly of 
components on the manufacturing line. 
b) Processing standardized routine activities such as data input, and cross-checking of the 
business system by software instead of the clerical staff members. 
c) Replacing manned stores with unmanned stores run by cameras and an electronic 
payment system for analysis of IC tags and images. 
d) Replacing transfer of stored products through manual operations by using a forklift or 
something similar with an automated warehouse system where computer control has 
rendered human labor obsolete. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 23 –
Q62. 
Which of the following is a system where the use of a state transition diagram is 
appropriate when the system is designed? 
 
a) Electricity charge calculation system that calculates charges based on the amount of 
power usage from power meter readings. 
b) Greenhouse control system that keeps the environment in a greenhouse optimal based on 
the data of an installed sensor. 
c) Inventory control system that performs the collection and aggregation of inventory 
assets at the end of every month and at the time of settlement. 
d) System that measures the operational status of the system resources and creates a report. 
 
 
Q63. 
Which of the following is an explanation of the digital divide? 
 
a) It refers to an economic or social gap that occurs due to differences in abilities and 
opportunities to use PCs and communications. 
b) It refers to communications and broadcast services that any citizen can access with 
standard charges, without any differences between regions. 
c) It refers to the ability of citizens to participate directly in the policies of government and 
autonomous bodies by using the Internet. 
d) It refers to the provision of all services in a single place for each event of the daily life of 
citizens or each field of corporate activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
– 24 –
Q64. 
Procurement is performed by using the comprehensive evaluation bidding method under 
the conditions shown below. When the bidding prices and technology points of Companies A 
to D are as shown in the table below, which of the following is the successful bidder? 
 
[Conditions] 
(1) The bidder with the highest comprehensive evaluation points obtained by summing 
up the price points and the technology points is the successful bidder. 
(2) The target price is 100,000 dollars. Any bids that exceed the target price are not 
evaluated. 
(3) The price points are calculated by the formula shown below. 
[1 − (Bidding price / Target price)] × 100 
 
[Bidding price and technology points of Companies A to D] 
 
Bidding price (1,000 dollars) 
Technology points 
Company A 
70 
50 
Company B 
80 
65 
Company C 
90 
80 
Company D 
110 
100 
 
a) Company A 
b) Company B 
c) Company C 
d) Company D 
 
 
Q65. 
Which of the following is an explanation of green procurement (sustainable 
procurement)? 
 
a) It refers to a certificate that enables commercial trading of green power that is generated 
from natural energy such as sunlight, biomass, wind power, and geothermal heat. 
b) It refers to a mass promotion of environmental protection activities and fund raising 
from investors for the environmental protection 
c) It refers to a preferential purchase of products and services that exert a lower 
environmental burden. 
d) It refers to international standards that employ labels to certify that a product contributes 
to environmental protection. 
 
 
 
 
 
– 25 –
Q66. 
Among the mechanisms that are utilized on the Internet, which of the following is an 
explanation of crowdfunding? 
 
a) It refers to a company placing an order with a person who is judged to be qualified to 
outsource work to an unspecified number of people on the website through prior 
notification of business operations. 
b) It refers to a web service for individuals that displays information on the account 
transactions of multiple financial institutions at once by a single authentication through 
prior registration of multiple account information. 
c) It refers to payment from an advertiser to a website operator when a person who is 
browsing the website purchases a product from the EC site by using the link from the 
published advertisement. 
d) It refers to raising money from an unspecified number of individuals who support a 
business project that is published on the website, and who expect to obtain products and 
rights in return. 
 
 
Q67. 
Which of the following is a characteristic of the maturity stage in the product life cycle? 
 
a) Demand decreases and some companies start withdrawing. A company determines 
whether it can be a strong player in this stage and considers advancing into alternative 
markets. 
b) Demand grows, and the product differentiation and segmentation of the market become 
evident. Competition intensifies, and it becomes important to add new models and 
reduce cost. 
c) Demand is partial, and cultivation of new demand is the key to success or failure. It is 
necessary to persuade specific targets with conviction. 
d) The market begins to understand the value of a product. Both the product line and the 
channel must be expanded. Sales increase, but investment is also needed in this stage. 
 
 
Q68. 
Which of the following is mostly tacit knowledge? 
 
a) A list of countries and their capitals 
b) An inventory of assets 
c) Contents of a washing machine manual 
d) How to ride a bicycle 
 
 
 
 
 
– 26 –
Q69. 
Which of the following is an appropriate example of a core technology for the creation 
of competitive advantage?  
 
a) It is a development technology that combines general components with the purpose of 
fast-track development and fast-track market introduction of products. 
b) It is a device technology that employs the same CPU core as that of competitors and 
enhances the portability of software. 
c) It is an idle reduction technology of an automobile engine that cannot be imitated by 
competitors. 
d) It is an interface technology whose purpose is to create standard interfaces by forming an 
alliance and use them commonly. 
 
 
Q70. 
A product that is produced through four (4) processes of A, B, C, and D must be produced 
in a quantity of 1,000 units per month. The table below lists the manufacturing time per unit, 
number of machines owned, and monthly production capacity in hours per machine for each 
process. Which of the following is a process that is lacking in capability? 
 
Process 
Manufacturing time 
per unit (hours) 
Number of machines 
owned (units) 
Monthly 
production capacity 
(hours/machine)  
A 
0.4 
3 
150 
B 
0.3 
2 
160 
C 
0.7 
4 
170 
D 
1.2 
7 
180 
 
a) A 
b) B 
c) C 
d) D 
 
 
