 
 
– 1 –
April 2023 
 
Fundamental IT Engineer Examination (Morning) 
 
Questions must be answered in accordance with the following: 
 
Question Nos. 
Q1 - Q80 
Question Selection 
All questions are compulsory. 
Examination Time 
9:30 - 12:00 (150 minutes) 
 
Instructions: 
1. 
Use a pencil.  If you need to change an answer, erase your previous answer completely and 
neatly.  Wipe away any eraser debris. 
 
2. 
Mark your examinee information and your answers in accordance with the instructions 
below.  Your answer will not be graded if you do not mark properly.  Do not mark nor 
write on the answer sheet outside of the prescribed places.  
(1) Examinee Number 
Write your examinee number in the space provided, and mark the appropriate space 
below each digit. 
(2) Date of Birth 
Write your date of birth (in numbers) exactly as it is printed on your examination 
admission card, and mark the appropriate space below each digit. 
(3) Answers 
Select one answer (a through d) for each question. 
Mark your answers as shown in the following sample question. 
 
[Sample Question] 
Q1. Which of the following should be used for marking your answer on the answer 
sheet? 
 
a) Ballpoint pen 
b) Crayon 
c) Fountain pen 
d) Pencil 
 
Since the correct answer is “d) Pencil”, mark the answer as below: 
 
[Sample Answer] 
Q1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ウ 
 
 
– 2 –
Symbols commonly used in questions  
 
Unless otherwise noted in each question, the following notational conventions are applied as 
shown in the table.  
 
Logic Circuit 
 
Graphic symbol  
Explanation  
 
AND gate  
 
NAND gate  
 
OR gate  
 
NOR gate  
 
Exclusive OR (XOR) gate  
 
Exclusive NOR gate  
 
Buffer  
 
NOT gate 
 
Three-state buffer (or tri-state buffer) 
 
 
A small circle or “bubble” on either the 
input or the output terminal shows inversion 
or negation of the logic state. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Company names or product names mentioned in the examination questions are the trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective companies or organizations. The symbol ® or ™ is not used within.  
 
 
– 3 –
Q1.  Which of the following is a Venn diagram that represents the set below?  
 
ሺ𝐴∩𝐶̅ሻ∪ሺ𝐴∩𝐵ത∩𝐶ሻ∪ሺ𝐴̅ ∩𝐵∩𝐶ሻ 
 
a) 
 
b) 
 
c) 
 
d) 
 
 
 
Q2.  When the hexadecimal value ABCD in a 32-bit register is logically shifted right by two bits, 
which of the following is the resulting value in hexadecimal? 
 
a) 2AF3 
b) 6AF3 
c) AF34 
d) EAF3 
 
 
Q3.  What is the probability that at least three coins land heads up when four unbiased coins are 
tossed simultaneously? 
 
a) 1/4 
b) 5/16 
c) 3/8 
d) 5/8 
 
 
 
 
 
– 4 –
Q4.  Random(n) is a function that returns an integer of 0 or more and less than n with a uniform 
probability. When the series of procedures below is run on the integer type variables A, B, and 
C, what is the probability that the value of C will be 0? 
 
A = Random(10) 
B = Random(10) 
C = A−B 
 
a) 
1
100  
b) 
1
20  
c) 
1
10  
d)  1 
 5   
 
 
Q5.  Which of the following matches the <variable-name> defined below in BNF? 
 
<number> :: = 0 | 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | 5 | 6 | 7 | 8 | 9 
<letter> :: = A | B | C | D | E | F 
<letter-and-number> :: = <letter> | <number> | _ 
<variable-name> :: = <letter> | <variable-name><letter-and-number> 
 
a) _B39 
b) 246 
c) 3E5 
d) F5_1 
 
 
Q6.  Which of the following is an error detection method where, on the sender side, the data sent 
accompanies a remainder of the data bit sequence divided by a specific generator polynomial, 
while on the receiver side, error detection is performed by checking if the received bit sequence 
is divisible by the same polynomial? 
 
a) CRC 
b) Hamming code  
c) Horizontal parity check 
d) Vertical parity check  
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 5 –
Q7.  Which of the following is the pre-order traversal of the tree below? 
 
9
3
10
1
6
14
4
7
13
 
 
a) 1, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9, 10, 13, 14 
b) 1, 4, 7, 6, 3, 13, 14, 10, 9 
c) 9, 3, 1, 6, 4, 7, 10, 14, 13 
d) 9, 3, 10, 1, 6, 14, 4, 7, 13 
 
 
Q8.  The operations for a queue are defined as below. 
 
ENQ n: 
This operation appends data n to the queue. 
DEQ: 
This operation removes data from the queue. 
On an empty queue, the operations ENQ 1, ENQ 2, ENQ 3, DEQ, ENQ 4, ENQ 5, DEQ, 
ENQ 6, DEQ, DEQ are performed. After that, when DEQ is performed, what is the value that 
is removed? 
 
a) 1 
b) 2 
c) 5 
d) 6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 6 –
Q9.  A five-digit number a1a2a3a4a5 needs to be stored in an array by means of hashing. When 
the hash function is mod (a1+a2+a3+a4+a5, 13) and the number is stored in the array element 
at the position corresponding to the calculated hash value, which of the following is the 
position where 54321 is stored in the array? Here, the value of mod (x, 13) is the remainder 
after dividing x by 13. 
 
Position 
Array 
0 
 
1 
 
2 
 
... 
... 
11 
 
12 
 
 
a) 1 
b) 2 
c) 7 
d) 11 
 
 
Q10. 
Which of the following is a program that achieves dynamic processing in a web 
environment and operates only on a web server? 
 
a) JavaScript 
b) Java applet 
c) Java servlet 
d) VBScript 
 
 
Q11. 
When a CPU has a special register used in push and pop instructions, which of the 
following is an appropriate term for this register?  
 
a) Instruction register 
b) Program counter 
c) Stack pointer 
d) Status register 
 
 
Q12. 
Which of the following is classified as an internal interrupt? 
 
a) Interrupt caused by an abnormal power condition, such as a momentary loss of 
commercial power supply 
b) Interrupt caused by performing a divide-by-zero operation 
c) Interrupt caused by the completion of input or output 
d) Interrupt caused by the occurrence of a memory parity error 
 
 
 
 
– 7 –
Q13. 
Which of the following is the technique that minimizes the number of write operations 
to the main memory by updating the data only in the cache memory and updating into the main 
memory later?  
 
a) Overlay 
b) Write back 
c) Write protected 
d) Write through 
 
 
Q14. 
Which of the following is an appropriate description of a 3D printer’s function?  
 
a) It detects the shape of three-dimensional objects and produces output of 3D data.  
b) It functions by pushing the pins of a high temperature printing head onto heat-sensitive 
paper.  
c) It makes three-dimensional objects using methods such as fused filament fabrication. 
d) It projects computer graphics onto uneven three-dimensional objects such as buildings 
and furniture. 
 
 
Q15. 
Which of the following is the RAID configuration for achieving the highest speed disk 
access at the cost of reliability?  
 
a) RAID 0 
b) RAID 1 
c) RAID 5 
d) RAID 6 
 
 
Q16. 
When system availabilities of a cold standby system, a simplex system, and a dual system 
are compared, which of the following shows the order arranged from highest to lowest? Here 
a computer or computers that compose each system are all the same. 
 
a) Cold standby system, dual system, simplex system  
b) Cold standby system, simplex system, dual system  
c) Dual system, cold standby system, simplex system  
d) Simplex system, cold standby system, dual system  
 
 
Q17. 
A printer prints 400 characters per second. The printer uses interrupt-driven I/O and each 
character printed requires an interrupt that takes 50 microseconds. What percentage of the 
printer's CPU is available to do other work during printing? Here, other overhead time for the 
CPU can be ignored. 
 
a) 98 
b) 96 
c) 4 
d) 2 
 
 
– 8 –
Q18. 
In preemptive Shortest Remaining Time First (SRTF) scheduling, on arrival or 
completion of any process, the scheduler schedules processes from the list of available 
processes and running processes that have the least remaining CPU-burst time. The four 
processes, namely, P1, P2, P3, and P4, their corresponding CPU-burst time and arrival time 
are shown in the table below. Which of the following is the average waiting time in 
milliseconds for the processes to be executed in preemptive SRTF scheduling?  
 
Process 
Arrival time in 
millisecond 
CPU-burst time in 
millisecond 
P1 
0 
8 
P2 
2 
3 
P3 
3 
7 
P4 
5 
4 
 
a) 3.0 
b) 4.75 
c) 5.5 
d) 10.25 
 
 
Q19. 
Among the different types of backup methods, which of the following is incremental 
backup? Here, in the first backup, all files are backed up and the information that indicates a 
file update managed by the operating system is reset. 
 
a) All files are backed up regardless of information indicating a file update, and the 
information indicating a file update is left unchanged. 
b) All files are backed up regardless of information indicating a file update, and the 
information indicating a file update is reset. 
c) Only files with information indicating a file update are backed up, and the information 
indicating a file update is left unchanged. 
d) Only files with information indicating a file update are backed up, and the information 
indicating a file update is reset. 
 
 
 
 
– 9 –
Q20. 
Which of the following is the logic circuit that is equivalent to the logical expression 
𝐴̅𝐵𝐶+ 𝐴𝐶? 
 
a) 
 
 
 
 
b) 
 
 
 
 
c) 
 
 
 
d) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Q21. 
Which of the following is the logic gate that is equivalent to the logic circuit shown 
below? 
 
 
 
a) 
 
b) 
 
c) 
 
d) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 10 –
Q22. 
At the rising edge of the clock signal, the content of an 8-bit serial-in parallel-out shift 
register is shifted upward, while positive logic data is simultaneously read into the least 
significant bit. The value is fixed at the rising edge of a strobe. When the results of an 
observation of each signal’s waveform are as shown in the diagram below, which of the 
following is the value of the shift register after it is fixed? Here, numeric values are represented 
in hexadecimal. 
 
Data
Strobe
Clock
Time
 
 
a) 63 
b) 8D 
c) B1 
d) C6 
 
 
Q23. 
Which of the following is a case where outline fonts rather than bitmap fonts are suitable 
for use? 
 
a) To display characters as quickly as possible  
b) To display characters in monospace  
c) To display single-byte and double-byte characters at the same time  
d) To enlarge characters by a given scale factor 
 
 
Q24. 
What is the approximate minimum required bandwidth for delivering a 30-frames/second 
video in 800 x 600 pixel and 24-bit full color? Here, the data is not compressed during 
communication. 
 
a) 350 kbps 
b) 3.5 Mbps 
c) 35 Mbps 
d) 350 Mbps 
 
 
Q25. 
Which of the following is an appropriate explanation of a relational database? 
 
a) It connects a parent record and a child record by using a pointer. 
b) It represents data in the form of a two-dimensional table. 
c) It represents the structure and meaning of data by using tags. 
d) It retains data and procedures in an integrated (or encapsulated) form. 
 
 
 
– 11 – 
Q26. 
Which of the following is the key of a relation schema R = (M, N, O, P, S, T), when R 
has the functional dependencies shown below? 
 
O → T 
S → M 
OS → P 
M → N 
 
a) MO 
b) MS 
c) OP 
d) OS 
 
 
Q27. 
Which of the following is an appropriate description of keys in a relational database?  
 
a) A primary key can be assigned as a composite key and must contain a column that is 
defined as a foreign key. 
b) The values of the primary and foreign keys cannot be duplicated and cannot be null. 
c) The values of the primary key must be unique, and the values of the foreign key must 
match the values of the related table’s primary key and can be duplicated. 
d) The values of the primary key need to match the values of the related table’s primary 
key, but the values of the foreign key do not need to match the values of the related 
table’s primary key. 
 
 
Q28. 
Which of the following is the appropriate interpretation of the conceptual data model 
shown in the diagram in UML? 
 
Belongs to
1..*
Department
0..*
Employee
 
 
a) A department cannot exist without any employees. 
b) An employee can belong to multiple departments at the same time. 
c) An employee does not have to belong to a department. 
d) The total number of employees and the total number of departments match. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 12 –
Q29. 
An employees table contains fields in the order shown below. 
 
• emp_id is an integer value and is used as the primary key of the table. 
• emp_name can store up to 10 characters. 
• salary is a decimal value up to 4 digits. 
 
Which of the following is an appropriate INSERT statement to insert the data to the table? Here, 
NOT NULL constraint does not exist and the table does not have any records before the insert. 
 
a) 
INSERT INTO employees (emp_id, emp_name) VALUES (4, 'Hulk');  
b) 
INSERT INTO employees (emp_id, salary, emp_name) VALUES (3, 'Taylor', 
1700); 
c) 
INSERT INTO employees (emp_id, salary, emp_name) VALUES (5, 1900, 
'Bartholomew'); 
d) 
INSERT INTO employees VALUES (2, 'Harry', 15000); 
 
 
Q30. 
Which of the following is the purpose of setting an index in the columns of the table of 
a relational database by a user? 
 
a) To enable economization of disk space when a single large table is distributed and saved 
on several disks. 
b) To enable efficient access to the storage location of data in order to improve the search 
speed. 
c) To ensure that no value is duplicated in a column. 
d) To match the value of the foreign key column with the value of the primary key of 
another table. 
 
 
Q31. 
Which of the following is a role of DNS in a TCP/IP network? 
 
a) A private IP address is translated into a global IP address in order to access the Internet. 
b) A program in a server can be invoked only by its name without taking the server’s IP 
address into consideration. 
c) Domain names, host names, and other such information are mapped to IP addresses. 
d) In response to an assignment request for an IP address from a PC or a printer, an unused 
address is chosen from the addresses registered in the server. 
 
 
 
 
– 13 –
Q32. 
In the same subnet, which of the following is the devices that will receive the data when 
the destination address is set to 255.255.255.255? 
 
a) All devices in the same subnet 
b) All devices using the same DNS server 
c) Only the default gateway of the subnet 
d) Only the device sending the data to itself 
 
 
Q33. 
How many host addresses are there in the network 192.168.10.0/26? 
 
a) 30 
b) 62 
c) 126 
d) 254 
 
 
Q34. 
In a TCP/IP network, which of the following is a protocol used to match the clocks of 
the server and the client? 
 
a) ARP 
b) ICMP 
c) NTP 
d) RIP 
 
 
Q35. 
As for the use of e-mails over the Internet, which of the following is a standard that 
extends the header field and can handle not only text but also audio and images? 
 
a) HTML 
b) MHS 
c) MIME 
d) SMTP 
 
 
Q36. 
Which of the following is malware that is activated by attackers to launch attacks on 
other computers?  
 
a) Bot 
b) Rootkit 
c) Trojan Horse 
d) Worm  
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 14 –
Q37. 
Which of the following is considered a violation of confidentiality?  
 
a) Denial of services to a website handling confidential information by generating fake 
heavy traffic in the network 
b) Destruction of server hardware storing personal information caused by high voltage due 
to failure of voltage stabilizer 
c) Disturbing communication by destroying ciphertext of confidential information 
d) Tricking a user into providing personal information to a fake website 
 
 
Q38. 
Which of the following is an appropriate description of “asymmetric encryption,” used 
for encrypting and decrypting messages for secure communication? 
 
a) A ciphertext message is shorter than its original plaintext message. 
b) A message receiver’s public key is used to encrypt the message and his/her private key 
is used to decrypt the message. 
c) A message sender’s private key is open to everyone and is used to encrypt the message, 
and each message receiver’s public key is used to decrypt the message. 
d) A secret key needs to be shared among those who need to receive the message. 
 
 
Q39. 
Which of the following is a method of social engineering used in a targeted e-mail attack? 
 
a) “Unsolicited advertising” is shown in the subject. 
b) Content that appears to be related to the work of the recipient is shown in the subject or 
body text. 
c) In order to make the recipients access a bogus website, the sender pretends to be a 
financial institution and sends e-mails indiscriminately. 
d) In order to make the recipients transfer a fee that they do not need to pay, the sender 
pretends to be a collection agency and sends e-mails indiscriminately. 
 
 
 
 
 
– 15 –
Q40. 
In information security, which of the following is a back door? 
 
a) A LAN port that is incorporated into a switch in order to obtain network communication 
packets and inspect details of the communication  
b) A tool that searches for an open TCP port on a server on the Internet, and identifies 
running services 
c) A URL that enables access to a website without going through the official procedures 
such as password authentication that are normally required for access  
d) An attack that causes a program to crash by entering a string with a length that exceeds 
the size of an area of memory acquired by the program, causing an overflow 
 
 
Q41. 
An asset valued at $200,000 has an exposure factor of 20% and an annual rate of 
occurrence of 0.5 for the risk of malware infection. How much (in dollars) is the annual loss 
expectancy of the asset due to malware infection? 
 
a) 20,000 
b) 40,000 
c) 80,000 
d) 100,000 
 
 
Q42. 
Which of the following is residual risk? 
 
a) Amount of risk that is reduced by implementing risk treatment 
b) Risk that exists prior to performing any risk management activities 
c) Risk that is identified prior to implementing risk treatment 
d) Risk that remains after implementing risk treatment 
 
 
Q43. 
Which of the following is a security measure that allows users to run potentially 
malicious programs on a system with the purpose of observing their behavior, while restricting 
the programs from accessing outside of the system? 
 
a) Firewall 
b) Honeypot 
c) IPS 
d) Sandbox 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 16 –
Q44. 
A packet filtering firewall is installed at the connection point of an internal network and 
the Internet. Which of the following is the appropriate combination of filtering rules that 
enables PCs on the internal network to access a web server on the Internet (port number 80)? 
 
a) 
Source 
Destination 
Source 
port number 
Destination 
port number 
 
PC 
Web server 
80 
1024 or higher 
 
Web server 
PC 
80 
1024 or higher 
 
b) 
Source 
Destination 
Source 
port number 
Destination 
port number 
 
PC 
Web server 
80 
1024 or higher 
 
Web server 
PC 
1024 or higher 
80 
 
c) 
Source 
Destination 
Source 
port number 
Destination 
port number 
 
PC 
Web server 
1024 or higher 
80 
 
Web server 
PC 
80 
1024 or higher 
 
d) 
Source 
Destination 
Source 
port number 
Destination 
port number 
 
PC 
Web server 
1024 or higher 
80 
 
Web server 
PC 
1024 or higher 
80 
 
 
Q45. 
When a sender from domain A sends an e-mail to a recipient in domain B, which of the 
following is used by the mail server in domain A for authenticating the sender? 
 
a) APOP 
b) POP3S 
c) S/MIME 
d) SMTP-AUTH 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 17 –
Q46. 
The diagram below is an example of a DFD that is used in the structured analysis method. 
Which of the following is represented by a “” in the diagram below? 
 
 
 
 
a) Activity 
b) Data flow 
c) Data store 
d) Process 
 
 
Q47. 
Among the definitions of software quality characteristics, which of the following 
characteristics refers to the ease of modifying a program for a certain computer so that it can 
run on a different architecture? 
 
a) Changeability 
b) Interoperability 
c) Portability 
d) Usability 
 
 
Q48. 
In the error embedding method, when the number of embedded errors is S, the number 
of discovered errors from the embedded errors is m, the number of latent errors before the 
start of testing not including embedded errors is T, and the total number of discovered errors 
is n, which of the following expresses the relationship of S, T, m, and n? 
 
a) 
௠
ௌ=
௡ି௠் 
b) 
௠
ௌ=்௡ି௠ 
c) 
௠
ௌ=
௡் 
d) 
௠
ௌ=்௡ 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 18 –
Q49. 
Which of the following is an appropriate test case when a test is to be performed with 
decision condition coverage (branch coverage) on the section of a program shown in the figure 
below? 
 
A   OR   B
Operation
FALSE
TRUE
 
 
a) 
A 
 
B 
 
b) 
A 
 
B 
 
c) 
A 
 
B 
 
d) 
A 
 
B 
False 
True 
 
False 
True 
 
False 
False 
 
False 
True 
 
 
 
True 
False 
 
True 
True 
 
True 
False 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
True 
True 
 
 
Q50. 
Which of the following is the appropriate term for referring to activities such as creating 
a class diagram in UML from a program? 
 
a) Backtracking 
b) Forward engineering 
c) Reengineering 
d) Reverse engineering 
 
 
Q51. 
As for software development activities, which of the following is refactoring? 
 
a) In order to improve the maintainability of a program, its internal structure is modified 
without any change to the external specifications. 
b) In order to improve the quality of a program, two programmers cooperate to perform the 
coding of a single program. 
c) In order to obtain feedback from users, the prototype of a program to be provided is 
created at an early stage. 
d) In order to promptly develop a program to be operated, test cases are set in advance and 
the program is then coded. 
 
 
 
 
– 19 –
Q52. 
Which of the following is an appropriate description of the stakeholders involved in a 
project? 
 
a) Some stakeholders receive the project result advantageously and others 
disadvantageously. 
b) The stakeholders are individually identified people, such as project managers. 
c) The stakeholders belong within the organization and do not exist outside of it. 
d) The stakeholders participate directly in the project; they are not limited to indirect 
involvement. 
 
 
Q53. 
In project management, which of the following is the subject group that includes 
processes having Purpose 1 and those having Purpose 2? 
 
[Purposes] 
Purpose 1: 
To clarify the objectives, deliverables, requirements, and boundaries of the 
project 
Purpose 2: 
To maximize the positive impacts to the project and minimize the negative 
impacts, both of which occur as a result of changes in the objectives and 
deliverables of the project 
 
a) Communication 
b) Procurement 
c) Risk 
d) Scope 
 
 
Q54. 
A project was planned to be completed in six months. After six months, the project is 
behind schedule. The actual cost of Activity A is $100,000. The planned value of Activity A 
is $80,000. Activity A is only 75% complete. What is the schedule performance index and 
cost performance index of the project? 
 
 
 
Schedule performance index 
Cost performance index 
a) 0.6  
0.75 
b) 0.75 
0.6 
c) 0.75  
1.25 
d) 1.25 
0.75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 20 –
Q55. 
Which of the following is an appropriate explanation of the Function Point method for 
creating an estimate for software development? 
 
a) It is a method for estimating the overall workload, where the development work is 
broken down into units of work items. The cumulative total of the workload for each 
item is then calculated based on a predefined standard value for the workload that is 
applied to each individual work item. 
b) It is a method for estimating the person-hours and development duration, on the 
assumption that the development scale is known. It can be applied to all fields, not just 
to the business field. 
c) It is a method for estimating the scale and person-hours of development based on some 
past experience of similar software, where similarities and differences of software are 
analyzed while past data is used for the similarities and past experience for the 
differences. 
d) It is a method for estimating the scale of software, where the functions of the software 
are quantitatively measured using elements such as the number of I/O data items and the 
number of files, and an adjustment is performed based on the complexity. 
 
 
Q56. 
When an IT service is discontinued, it is important to comprehensively identify the assets 
that were used and appropriately remove or free surplus assets. Which of the following is an 
event that may occur due to mistaken removal of assets that should remain, but does not 
occur because of the removal of assets that should be removed? 
 
a) Occurrence of incidents involving other IT services that share assets with the 
discontinued IT service 
b) Overpaying software or hardware maintenance charges  
c) Wasting money on software licenses 
d) Wasting space that becomes unused on magnetic disks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 21 –
Q57. 
As for activities in capacity management to estimate a service’s capacity, capability, and 
performance, which of the following is trend analysis? 
 
a) As the first phase of modeling, creating a model that accurately reflects the current 
performance 
b) Generating simulated transactions and predicting the response time and throughput of a 
service 
c) Understanding the chronological usage of a specific resource and predicting usage 
changes in the future 
d) Using mathematical techniques, such as queueing theory, and predicting the response 
time and throughput of a service 
 
 
Q58. 
Which of the following is an appropriate description concerning system operation? 
 
a) Disconnecting failed components to continue the system’s more important functions is 
called fall back operation. 
b) Re-executing a program using data recorded at a checkpoint is called rebooting. 
c) Recording transactions for the purpose of restoring a database to its condition prior to 
changes is called data logging. 
d) Regularly saving files to another recording media for the purpose of restoration in the 
event of failure is called restoring. 
 
 
Q59. 
In the system design phase, when an audit is performed on the control to reduce the risk 
of user requirements not being met, which of the following is a point to be checked? 
 
a) Whether programming is performed in accordance with the specified conventions and 
standards  
b) Whether the program specifications are created based on the system design documents  
c) Whether the test plan is created based on the system test requirements, and the 
manager’s approval of the system operations department is obtained  
d) Whether the user department participates in the review of the system design documents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 22 –
Q60. 
When an information system department enters data sheets issued by a business 
operations department, which of the following is an appropriate task executed by the 
information system department? 
 
a) The data sheets are retained in the information system department until the due date for 
processing, and the number of sheets received is checked and confirmed just before the 
due date. 
b) To enable the business operations department to check the processing results of each 
data sheet, the processing results list is sent to that department. 
c) To prevent unauthorized use or leakage of confidential information, data sheets are 
disposed of immediately after data entry is completed. 
d) When the data sheet contains an obvious error, the data sheet is corrected, and an entry is 
made at the discretion of the person in charge of data entry. 
 
 
Q61. 
Which of the following is an example of RPA that is used to proceed with business 
innovation with the aim of resolving management issues, such as a shortage of staff members? 
 
a) Deploying robots for assembly work instead of employees engaged in the assembly of 
components on the manufacturing line. 
b) Processing standardized routine activities such as data input, and cross-checking of the 
business system by software instead of the clerical staff members. 
c) Replacing manned stores with unmanned stores run by cameras and an electronic 
payment system for analysis of IC tags and images. 
d) Replacing transfer of stored products through manual operations by using a forklift or 
something similar with an automated warehouse system where computer control has 
rendered human labor obsolete. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 23 –
Q62. 
Which of the following is a system where the use of a state transition diagram is 
appropriate when the system is designed? 
 
a) Electricity charge calculation system that calculates charges based on the amount of 
power usage from power meter readings. 
b) Greenhouse control system that keeps the environment in a greenhouse optimal based on 
the data of an installed sensor. 
c) Inventory control system that performs the collection and aggregation of inventory 
assets at the end of every month and at the time of settlement. 
d) System that measures the operational status of the system resources and creates a report. 
 
 
Q63. 
Which of the following is an explanation of the digital divide? 
 
a) It refers to an economic or social gap that occurs due to differences in abilities and 
opportunities to use PCs and communications. 
b) It refers to communications and broadcast services that any citizen can access with 
standard charges, without any differences between regions. 
c) It refers to the ability of citizens to participate directly in the policies of government and 
autonomous bodies by using the Internet. 
d) It refers to the provision of all services in a single place for each event of the daily life of 
citizens or each field of corporate activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
– 24 –
Q64. 
Procurement is performed by using the comprehensive evaluation bidding method under 
the conditions shown below. When the bidding prices and technology points of Companies A 
to D are as shown in the table below, which of the following is the successful bidder? 
 
[Conditions] 
(1) The bidder with the highest comprehensive evaluation points obtained by summing 
up the price points and the technology points is the successful bidder. 
(2) The target price is 100,000 dollars. Any bids that exceed the target price are not 
evaluated. 
(3) The price points are calculated by the formula shown below. 
[1 − (Bidding price / Target price)] × 100 
 
[Bidding price and technology points of Companies A to D] 
 
Bidding price (1,000 dollars) 
Technology points 
Company A 
70 
50 
Company B 
80 
65 
Company C 
90 
80 
Company D 
110 
100 
 
a) Company A 
b) Company B 
c) Company C 
d) Company D 
 
 
Q65. 
Which of the following is an explanation of green procurement (sustainable 
procurement)? 
 
a) It refers to a certificate that enables commercial trading of green power that is generated 
from natural energy such as sunlight, biomass, wind power, and geothermal heat. 
b) It refers to a mass promotion of environmental protection activities and fund raising 
from investors for the environmental protection 
c) It refers to a preferential purchase of products and services that exert a lower 
environmental burden. 
d) It refers to international standards that employ labels to certify that a product contributes 
to environmental protection. 
 
 
 
 
 
– 25 –
Q66. 
Among the mechanisms that are utilized on the Internet, which of the following is an 
explanation of crowdfunding? 
 
a) It refers to a company placing an order with a person who is judged to be qualified to 
outsource work to an unspecified number of people on the website through prior 
notification of business operations. 
b) It refers to a web service for individuals that displays information on the account 
transactions of multiple financial institutions at once by a single authentication through 
prior registration of multiple account information. 
c) It refers to payment from an advertiser to a website operator when a person who is 
browsing the website purchases a product from the EC site by using the link from the 
published advertisement. 
d) It refers to raising money from an unspecified number of individuals who support a 
business project that is published on the website, and who expect to obtain products and 
rights in return. 
 
 
Q67. 
Which of the following is a characteristic of the maturity stage in the product life cycle? 
 
a) Demand decreases and some companies start withdrawing. A company determines 
whether it can be a strong player in this stage and considers advancing into alternative 
markets. 
b) Demand grows, and the product differentiation and segmentation of the market become 
evident. Competition intensifies, and it becomes important to add new models and 
reduce cost. 
c) Demand is partial, and cultivation of new demand is the key to success or failure. It is 
necessary to persuade specific targets with conviction. 
d) The market begins to understand the value of a product. Both the product line and the 
channel must be expanded. Sales increase, but investment is also needed in this stage. 
 
 
Q68. 
Which of the following is mostly tacit knowledge? 
 
a) A list of countries and their capitals 
b) An inventory of assets 
c) Contents of a washing machine manual 
d) How to ride a bicycle 
 
 
 
 
 
– 26 –
Q69. 
Which of the following is an appropriate example of a core technology for the creation 
of competitive advantage?  
 
a) It is a development technology that combines general components with the purpose of 
fast-track development and fast-track market introduction of products. 
b) It is a device technology that employs the same CPU core as that of competitors and 
enhances the portability of software. 
c) It is an idle reduction technology of an automobile engine that cannot be imitated by 
competitors. 
d) It is an interface technology whose purpose is to create standard interfaces by forming an 
alliance and use them commonly. 
 
 
Q70. 
A product that is produced through four (4) processes of A, B, C, and D must be produced 
in a quantity of 1,000 units per month. The table below lists the manufacturing time per unit, 
number of machines owned, and monthly production capacity in hours per machine for each 
process. Which of the following is a process that is lacking in capability? 
 
Process 
Manufacturing time 
per unit (hours) 
Number of machines 
owned (units) 
Monthly 
production capacity 
(hours/machine)  
A 
0.4 
3 
150 
B 
0.3 
2 
160 
C 
0.7 
4 
170 
D 
1.2 
7 
180 
 
a) A 
b) B 
c) C 
d) D 
 
 
Q71. 
Which of the following is an explanation of cryptocurrency mining that is enabled by  
block chain? 
 
a) Making payments or settlements by using cryptocurrency in brick-and-mortar stores 
b) Obtaining capital gain by buying and selling cryptocurrency 
c) Obtaining cryptocurrency as a reward for participation in checking or record calculation 
of cryptocurrency transactions 
d) Transferring money to an individual or organization in cryptocurrency 
 
 
 
 
– 27 –
Q72. 
Which of the following is an explanation of a sharing economy? 
 
a) It is a concept by which efficient management and operation of renewable energy and 
urban infrastructure are performed by using IT, which leads to an improvement in the 
quality of peoples’ lives and helps achieve continuous economic growth. 
b) It is a concept by which the productivity of an entire economy increases as a result of 
utilizing IT, and the supply and demand gap is eliminated via the progress of SCM, 
which leads to sustainable growth free from inflation. 
c) It is a mechanism by which sales both over-the-counter and through the Internet are 
combined in a business transaction, and the benefits of both are utilized and linked to 
expand overall sales. 
d) It is a mechanism mainly between individuals by which the community function and 
other functions of social media are utilized to share, lend, or borrow unused assets 
owned by individuals.  
 
 
Q73. 
Which of the following is an appropriate explanation of digital signage? 
 
a) A technology to embed identification information in data to prevent abuse 
b) An economic or social gap among regions or individuals, arising from lack of 
opportunities and abilities to utilize information technology 
c) An electronic billboard that displays information such as images and characters 
d) An electronic signature that is used to ensure the validity of information 
 
 
Q74. 
Which of the following is an appropriate description of the constituent elements of IoT? 
 
a) They cover all items that can connect to the Internet or a closed network. 
b) They cover all tangible objects except humans and living things. 
c) They cover digital type devices, and do not cover analog type devices. 
d) They cover only devices that autonomously collect data and perform data analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
– 28 –
Q75. 
Which of the following is a characteristic of OJT? 
 
a) A dedicated approach to education is possible outside of the workplace. 
b) Because the boss or senior accosiates provide education in hands-on knowledge and 
technical skills by staying close to practical affairs, the required competency can be 
acquired. 
c) Education that focuses on generalized knowledge and technology can be acquired. 
d) Regardless of the ability of the boss or senior associates, occupational knowledge of a 
specific standard can be acquired. 
 
 
Q76. 
To secure transparency in business administration, which of the following is a concept 
that supervises and monitors a company’s activities from the perspective of questions such as 
for whom the company runs its business, how top management is structured, and whether the 
organization has self-improvement capabilities? 
 
a) Core competence 
b) Corporate governance  
c) Corporate identity  
d) Stakeholder analysis 
 
 
Q77. 
Which of the following is a description of the ABC analysis? 
 
a) It analyzes a region in more detail on the basis of various data (population, purchasing 
power, etc.) by dividing the region into a grid with multiple sections. 
b) It arranges products in order of high sales or high gross profit, divides them into levels 
on the basis of the cumulative ratio, and then plans to increase the volume of product 
sales at high levels. 
c) It classifies and aggregates multiple parts of the survey data by factor, and analyzes the 
sales capacity and status of purchasing the same products. 
d) It repeatedly surveys the same panelist (respondent) many times. This data is used to 
understand regional trends or changes in the purchasers. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
– 29 –
Q78. 
There are several quality control tools that are used primarily for manufacturing and 
inspection departments.  Which of the following is a graph where appropriate units or 
attributes for the data are set on the vertical and horizontal axes correspondingly and measured 
values are plotted accordingly?  
 
a) Control chart 
b) Histogram 
c) Pareto chart 
d) Scatter diagram  
 
 
Q79. A company plans to provide a product with a fixed cost of $128,000, a variable cost per 
unit of $48, and a selling price per unit of $80. Which of the following is the point of sales (in 
dollars) to become break-even? 
 
a) 240,000 
b) 320,000 
c) 480,000 
d) 560,000 
 
 
Q80. 
In developing new products that are expected to be employed by government agencies 
of WTO member countries, which of the following are the appropriate standards to be applied? 
 
a) ANSI standards 
b) FCC standards  
c) IEEE standards 
d) ISO standards 
 
 
